Maintenance: CSS flex guide: updates to guide 3 (#34178)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/css_flexible_box_layout/aligning_items_in_a_flex_container/index.md

{{CSSRef}}

One of the reasons that flexbox is so useful is that enables proper alignment, including providing a quick method of vertically centering boxes. In this guide, we will take a thorough look at how the alignment and justification properties work in flexbox.

To center a box, we use the {{cssxref("align-items")}} property to align our item on the {{glossary("cross axis")}}, which in this case is the [block axis](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Flow_relative_values) running vertically. We use {{cssxref("justify-content")}} to align the item on the main axis, which in this case is the inline axis running horizontally.

![The cross axis is the vertical axis and the main axis is the horizontal axis.](align1.png)

Change the size of the container or nested element in the code example below. The nested element always remains centered.

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/flexbox/alignment/intro.html", '100%', 700)}}

> 

Reviewer: L19
```diff
## Properties for controlling alignment in flexbox
```

> - {{cssxref("justify-content")}} — controls alignment of all items on the main axis.
> - {{cssxref("align-items")}} — controls alignment of all items on the cross axis.
> - {{cssxref("align-self")}} — controls alignment of an individual flex item on the cross axis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- {{cssxref("justify-content")}}: Controls the alignment of all items on the main axis.
- {{cssxref("align-items")}}: Controls the alignment of all items on the cross axis.
- {{cssxref("align-self")}}: Controls the alignment of an individual flex item on the cross axis.
```

> - {{cssxref("align-content")}} — controls space between flex lines on the cross axis.
> - {{cssxref("gap")}}, {{cssxref("column-gap")}}, and {{cssxref("row-gap")}} — used to create gaps or gutters between flex items.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- {{cssxref("align-content")}}: Controls the space between flex lines on the cross axis.
- {{cssxref("gap")}}, {{cssxref("column-gap")}}, and {{cssxref("row-gap")}}: Used to create gaps or gutters between flex items.
```

We will also discover how auto margins can be used for alignment in flexbox.

> ## The Cross Axis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Aligning items on the cross axis
```

> The {{cssxref("align-items")}} property, set on the flex container, and {{cssxref("align-self")}} property, set on flex items, control alignment of our flex items on the cross axis, down the columns if {{cssxref("flex-direction")}} is `row` and along the row if `flex-direction` is `column`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {{cssxref("align-items")}} property, set on the flex container, and the {{cssxref("align-self")}} property, set on flex items, control the alignment of flex items on the cross axis. The cross axis runs down the columns if {{cssxref("flex-direction")}} is `row` and along the rows if `flex-direction` is `column`.
```

> We are making use of cross-axis alignment in this basic flex example. When we add `display: flex` to a container, the child items all become flex items arranged in a row. By default, they will all stretch to be as tall as the tallest item, as that item is defining the height of the items on the cross axis. If your flex container has a height set, then the items will stretch to that height, regardless of how much content is in the item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this basic flex example, we're using cross-axis alignment. When we add `display: flex` to a container, the child items become flex items arranged in a row. By default, they will all stretch to match the height of the tallest item, as that item defines the height of the items on the cross axis. If the flex container has a height set, the items will stretch to that height, regardless of how much content is in each item.
```

We can use other values to control how the items align:

- `align-items: stretch`
- `align-items: flex-start`
- `align-items: flex-end`
- `align-items: start`
- `align-items: end`
- `align-items: center`
- `align-items: baseline`
- `align-items: first baseline`
- `align-items: last baseline`

> In the live example below, the value of `align-items` is `stretch`. Try the other values and see how all of the items align against each other in the flex container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, the value of `align-items` is `stretch`. Try the other values and see how the items align against each other in the flex container.
```

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/flexbox/alignment/align-items.html", '100%', 520)}}

### Aligning one item with `align-self`

> The `align-items` property sets the `align-self` property on all of the flex items as a group. This means you can explicitly declare the {{cssxref("align-self")}} property to target a single item. The `align-self` property accepts all of the same values as `align-items` plus a value of `auto`, which will reset the value to that which is defined on the flex container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `align-items` property sets the `align-self` property on all of the flex items as a group. This means you can explicitly declare the {{cssxref("align-self")}} property to target a single item. The `align-self` property accepts all of the same values as `align-items`, plus a value of `auto`, which resets the value to that defined on the flex container.
```

In this next live example, the flex container has `align-items: flex-start`, which means the items are all aligned to the start of the cross axis. Using the `first-child` selector, the first item is set to `align-self: stretch`. Another item with the `selected` class has `align-self: center` set. Change the value of `align-items` or change the values of `align-self` on the individual items to see how this works.

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/flexbox/alignment/align-self.html", '100%', 650)}}

### Changing the main axis

> Thus far, we have looked at alignment behavior when the `flex-direction` has defaulted to `row` while working in a language written top to bottom, with a horizontal main axis and vertical cross axis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus far, we have looked at alignment behavior when the `flex-direction` defaults to `row` while working in a language written top to bottom, with a horizontal main axis and vertical cross axis.
```

![Three items, the first aligned to flex-start, second to center, third to flex-end. Aligning on the vertical axis.](align4.png)

> Keeping the same writing mode, when the `flex-direction` is changed to `column`, the `align-items` and `align-self` will align the items to the left and right instead of top and bottom; these properties are still aligning items along the cross axis, but the cross axis is now horizontal!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keeping the same writing mode, when the `flex-direction` is changed to `column`, the `align-items` and `align-self` properties will align the items to the left and right instead of top and bottom; these properties are still aligning items along the cross axis, but the cross axis is now horizontal!
```

> ## Aligning content on the cross axis — the align-content property

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Aligning content on the cross axis with the `align-content` property
```

> So far we have been aligning the items, or an individual item inside the area defined by a {{glossary("flex-container")}} containing line of flex items. When the flex items are allowed to wrap across multiple flex lines, the {{cssxref("align-content")}} property can be used to control the distribution of space between the lines, also known as **packing flex lines**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far, we have focused on aligning items or an individual items inside the area defined by a {{glossary("flex_container")}} containing a single line of flex items. When flex items are allowed to wrap across multiple lines, the {{cssxref("align-content")}} property can be used to control the distribution of space between the lines, also known as **packing flex lines**.
```

> For `align-content` to have an effect, the cross axis dimension (the height in this case) of your flex container must be greate than needed to display the items. It then works on all the items as a set. The `align-content` values dictates what happens with the extra available space, and the alignment of the entire set of items within it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For `align-content` to have an effect, the cross axis dimension (the height in this case) of the flex container must be greater than needed to display the items. It then works on all the items as a set. The `align-content` values dictate what happens with the extra available space and the alignment of the entire set of items within it.
```

The `align-content` property takes the following values:

- `align-content: flex-start`
- `align-content: flex-end`
- `align-content: start`
- `align-content: fend`
- `align-content: center`
- `align-content: space-between`
- `align-content: space-around`
- `align-content: space-evenly`
- `align-content: stretch`
- `align-content: normal` (behaves as `stretch`)
- `align-content: baseline`
- `align-content: first baseline`
- `align-content: last baseline`

> In the live example below, the flex container has a height of 400 pixels, which is more than needed to display our items. The value of `align-content` is `space-between`, which means that the available space is shared out _between_ the flex lines, which are placed flush with the start and end of the container on the cross axis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the live example below, the flex container has a height of `400 pixels`, which is more than needed to display our items. The value of `align-content` is `space-between`, which means that the available space is shared out _between_ the flex lines, which are placed flush with the start and end of the container on the cross axis.
```

> ### Alignment and Writing Modes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Alignment and writing modes
```

> Remember that with all of these alignment methods, the values of `start` and `end` are writing mode-aware. If the value of `justify-content` is `start` and the writing mode is left-to-right as in English, the items will line up starting at the left side of the container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that with all of these alignment methods, the values of `start` and `end` are writing mode-aware. If the value of `justify-content` is `start` and the writing mode is left-to-right, as in English, the items will align starting at the left side of the container.
```

> ## Alignment and flex-direction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Alignment and `flex-direction`
```

> The direction of `start` of the line will also change if you change the `flex-direction` property — for example using `row-reverse` instead of `row`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The direction of `start` of the line will also change if you change the `flex-direction` property — for example, using `row-reverse` instead of `row`.
```

> In this next example, `flex-direction: row-reverse` and `justify-content: flex-end` define the direction and location of the items within the flex container. In a left to right language the items all line up on the left. Try changing `flex-direction: row-reverse` to `flex-direction: row`. You will see that the items now move to the right-hand side and the visual order of the items is reversed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this next example, `flex-direction: row-reverse` and `justify-content: flex-end` define the direction and location of the items within the flex container. In a left to right language, the items line up on the left. Try changing `flex-direction: row-reverse` to `flex-direction: row`. You will see that the items now move to the right-hand side, and the visual order of the items is reversed.
```

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/flexbox/alignment/justify-content-reverse.html", '100%', 440)}}

> While this may all seem a little confusing, the rule to remember is that unless you do something to change it, flex items lay themselves out in the direction that words are laid out in the language of your document along the inline, row axis. `start` and `flex-start` will be where the start of a sentence of text would begin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this may all seem a little confusing, the rule to remember is that unless you do something to change it, flex items lay themselves out in the direction that words are laid out in the language of your document along the inline, row axis. `start` and `flex-start` will be where the beginning of a sentence of text would start.
```

![Diagram showing start on the left and end on the right.](align8.png)

> You can switch them to display in the block direction for the language of your document by selecting `flex-direction: column`. Then `start` and `flex-start` will then be where the top of your first paragraph of text would start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can switch them to display in the block direction for the language of your document by selecting `flex-direction: column`. Then, `start` and `flex-start` will be where the top of your first paragraph of text would start.
```

We don't have a `justify-items` or `justify-self` property available to us on the main axis as our items are treated as a group on that axis. However it is possible to do some individual alignment in order to separate an item or a group of items from others by using auto margins along with flexbox.

> A common pattern is a navigation bar where some key items are aligned to the right, with the main group on the left. You might think that this should be a use case for a `justify-self` property, however consider the image below. As an example, take the following image with three items on one side and two on the other. If `justify-self` were to work on flex items and was set on item _d_, it would also change the alignment of item _e_ that follows, which may or may not be what is intended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common pattern is a navigation bar where some key items are aligned to the right, with the main group on the left. You might think that this should be a use case for a `justify-self` property. However, consider the image below. As an example, take the following image with three items on one side and two on the other. If `justify-self` were to work on flex items and was set on item _d_, it would also change the alignment of item _e_ that follows, which may or may not be what is intended.
```

![Five items, in two groups. Three on the left and two on the right.](align7.png)

Instead, the _d_ item can be pushed over using CSS margins.

In this live example, item 4 is separated from the first three items by setting {{cssxref("margin-left")}} to `auto`, which consumes all the space it can in its axis. This is how centering a block with {{cssxref("margin")}} auto left and right works. Each side tries to take as much space as it can, and so the block is pushed into the middle.

In this live example, the flex items are arranged in a row with the basic flex values, and the class `push`, set on the fourth item, applies `margin-left: auto` to that item. Try removing the class on the fourth item or adding the class to a different item to see how it works.

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/flexbox/alignment/auto-margins.html", '100%', 470)}}

## Creating gaps between items

> To create a gap between flex items, use the {{cssxref("gap")}}, {{cssxref("column-gap")}}, and {{cssxref("row-gap")}} properties. The {{cssxref("column-gap")}} property creates gaps between items in a row. The {{cssxref("row-gap")}} property creates gaps between flex lines, when you have {{cssxref("flex-wrap")}} set to `wrap`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a gap between flex items, use the {{cssxref("gap")}}, {{cssxref("column-gap")}}, and {{cssxref("row-gap")}} properties. The {{cssxref("column-gap")}} property creates gaps between items in a row. The {{cssxref("row-gap")}} property creates gaps between flex lines when you have {{cssxref("flex-wrap")}} set to `wrap`.
```

The {{cssxref("gap")}} property is a shorthand that sets both `row-gap` and `column-gap`.

> The gap between flex items or between flex line depends on the direction. If the {{cssxref("flex-direction")}} property creates rows, the first value defines the gap between flex lines and the second value defines the gap between items within each line. With columns, (when `flex-direction` is set to `column` or `column-reverse`) the first value defines the gap between flex items and the second value defines the gaps between flex lines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The gap between flex items or between flex line depends on the direction. If the {{cssxref("flex-direction")}} property creates rows, the first value defines the gap between flex lines, and the second value defines the gap between items within each line. With columns (when `flex-direction` is set to `column` or `column-reverse`), the first value defines the gap between flex items, and the second value defines the gaps between flex lines.
```
